# Toughness

In the very first chapter, Dan Carlin asks the question "Do tough times make tough people?" Toughness, it's implied, is correlated to survival: if a tough people goes up against a less-tough people, one will survive. Carlin draws on the Romans, the Spartans, the Medes, the Afghanis, and "the Greatest Generation" in America to make the point: but he also muddles the water, arguing that "toughness," while certainly a real thing, is impossible to quantify. 

A few things occurred to me. First, the Spartans filled a niche of "most warlike people," and in their own day, that enabled them to thrive against other peoples. But there are other niches: as Carlin himself pointed out, you could be "the most clever," "the most technologically advanced," or "the most organized" to counter-balance "most warlike." In other words, "softer" civilizations (made soft *by* civilization, it's supposed) have their own advantages. I think a fan of the Spartans would say "Well, take away the technology, and what are you?" Which is kind of like saying "Well, take away the Iron Man suit and what are you?" (Which was the theme of both Iron Man 3 and Spider-Man: Homecoming. Take away the suit, and what are you?)

Second, I'm personally not as interested in survival of whole people's. I'm more interested in survival for me. How am I going to "survive and thrive" in the job market? In my relationships? In my Church? And within the context of the modern world? I think of David Foster Wallace here, when he says that "to function effectively in an environment that precludes everything vital and human is the key to modern life." How do you function in a world like that, where the demands can seem too much? (Charles Taylor's "maximal demand")

I think what I take away from the Spartans is that they excelled in a niche, and survived because of it. They rigorously followed a certain regiment, and disciplined themselves, to shape themselves into a certain kind of person. I need to consider that: what sort of person will I shape myself into? And in the context of my world (my relationships, my career, my living in a strange, modern world) how will that help me not just survive, but thrive? And–of course–do I have to wait for "tough times" to make myself into all of that?